Behaviorism
Behaviorism  is a systematic approach to understanding the behavior of humans and other animals.[1][2] It assumes that
behavior is either a reflex  elicited by the pairing of certain antecedent stimuli  in the environment, or a consequence of that
individual's history, including especially reinforcement  and punishment  contingencies , together with the individual's current
motivational state  and controlling stimuli . Although behaviorists generally accept the important role of heredity  in determining
behavior, deriving from Skinner's two levels of selection (phylogeny and ontogeny),[3] they focus primarily on environmental
events. The cognitive revolution  of the late 20th century largely replaced behaviorism as an explanatory theory with cognitive
psychology , which unlike behaviorism views internal mental states as explanations for observable behavior.
Behaviorism emerged in the early 1900s as a reaction to depth psychology  and other traditional forms of psychology, which often
had difficulty making predictions that could be tested experimentally. It was derived from earlier research in the late nineteenth
century, such as when Edward Thorndike  pioneered the law of effect , a procedure that involved the use of consequences to
strengthen or weaken behavior.
With a 1924 publication, John B. Watson  devised methodological behaviorism, which rejected introspective methods  and sought
to understand behavior by only measuring observable behaviors and events. It was not until 1945 that B. F. Skinner  proposed that
covert behavior—including cognition  and emotions —are subject to the same controlling  variables as observable behavior,[4] which
became the basis for his philosop hy called radical  behaviorism .[5][6] While Watson and Ivan Pavlov  investigated how
(conditioned) neutral stimuli elicit reflexes in respondent conditioning , Skinner assessed the reinforcement histories of the
discriminative (antecedent) stimuli that emit behavior; the process became known as operant conditioning .
The application of radical behaviorism—known as applied behavior analysis —is used in a variety of contexts, including applied
animal behavior and organizational behavior management , to the treatment of mental disorders, such as autism  and substance
abuse .[7][8] In addition, while behaviorism and cognitive  schools of psychological thought do not agree theoretically, they have
complemented each other in the cognitive-behavioral therapies , which have demonstrated utility in treating certain pathologies,
including simple phobias , PTSD , and mood disorders .
The titles given to the various branches of behaviorism include:
Behavioral genetics: Proposed in 1869 by Francis Galton, a relative of Charles Darwin. Galton believed that inherited factors had a
significant impact on individuals' behaviors, however did not believe nurturing was not important.
Interbehaviorism: Proposed by Jacob Robert Kantor before B. F. Skinner's writings.
Methodological behaviorism: John B. Watson's behaviorism states that only public events (motor behaviors of an individual) can be
objectively observed. Although it was still acknowledged that thoughts and feelings exist, they were not considered part of the
science of behavior.[5][9][10] It also laid the theoretical foundation for the early approach behavior modification in the 1970s and
1980s. Often compared to the views of B.F Skinner (radical behaviorism). Methodological behaviorism "representing the logical
positivist-derived philosophy of science" which is common in science today, radical focuses on the "pragmatist perspective."
JSTOR 27759016 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/27759016)
Psychological behaviorism: As proposed by Arthur W. Staats, unlike the previous behaviorisms of Skinner, Hull, and Tolman, was
based upon a program of human research involving various types of human behavior. Psychological behaviorism introduces new
principles of human learning. Humans learn not only by animal learning principles but also by special human learning principles.
Those principles involve humans' uniquely huge learning ability. Humans learn repertoires that enable them to learn other things.
Human learning is thus cumulative. No other animal demonstrates that ability, making the human species unique.[11]
Radical behaviorism: Skinner's philosophy is an extension of Watson's form of behaviorism by theorizing that processes within the
organism—particularly, private events, such as thoughts and feelings—are also part of the science of behavior, and suggests that
environmental variables control these internal events just as they control observable behaviors. Behavioral events may be observable
but not all are, some are considered "private": they are accessible and noticed by only the person who is behaving. B.F. Skinner
described behavior as the name for the part of the functioning of the organism that consists of its interacting or having commerce
with its surrounding environment. In simple terms, how an individual interacts with its surrounding environment.[RB] (https://doi.
org/10.1007/BF03395771) Although private events cannot be directly seen by others, they are later determined through the species'
overt behavior. Radical behaviorism forms the core philosophy behind behavior analysis. Willard Van Orman Quine used many of
radical behaviorism's ideas in his study of knowledge and language.[9]
Teleological behaviorism: Proposed by Howard Rachlin, post-Skinnerian, purposive, close to microeconomics. Focuses on objective
observation as opposed to cognitive processes.
Theoretical behaviorism: Proposed by J. E. R. Staddon,[12][13][14] adds a concept of internal state to allow for the effects of context.
According to theoretical behaviorism, a state is a set of equivalent histories, i.e., past histories in which members of the same
stimulus class produce members of the same response class (i.e., B. F. Skinner's concept of the operant). Conditioned stimuli are
thus seen to control neither stimulus nor response but state. Theoretical behaviorism is a logical extension of Skinner's class-based
(generic) definition of the operant.
Two subtypes of theoretical behaviorism are:
Hullian and post-Hullian: theoretical, group data, not dynamic, physiological
Purposive: Tolman's behavioristic anticipation of cognitive psychologyBranches
B. F. Skinner proposed radical behaviorism as the conceptual underpinning of the experimental analysis of behavior . This
viewpoint differs from other approaches to behavioral research in various ways, but, most notably here, it contrasts with
methodological behaviorism in accepting feelings, states of mind and introspection as behaviors also subject to scientific
investigation. Like methodological behaviorism, it rejects the reflex as a model of all behavior, and it defends the science of
behavior as complementary to but independent of physiology. Radical behaviorism overlaps considerably with other western
philosophical positions, such as American pragmatism .[15]
Although John B. Watson mainly emphasized his position of methodological behaviorism throughout his career, Watson and
Rosalie Rayner conducted the infamous Little Albert experiment  (1920), a study in which Ivan Pavlov 's theory  to respondent
conditioning was first applied to eliciting a fearful reflex of crying in a human infant, and this became the launching point for
understanding covert behavior (or private events) in radical  behaviorism;[16] however, Skinner felt that aversive stimuli should
only be experimented on with animals and spoke out against Watson for testing something so controversial on a human.
In 1959, Skinner observed the emotions of two pigeons by noting that they appeared angry because their feathers ruffled. The
pigeons were placed together in an operant chamber, where they were aggressive as a consequence of previous reinforcement  in
the environment. Through stimulus control  and subsequent discrimination training, whenever Skinner turned off the green light,
the pigeons came to notice that the food reinforcer is discontinued  following each peck and responde d without aggression.
Skinner concluded that humans also learn aggression and possess such emotions (as well as other private events) no differently
than do nonhuman animals.
As experimental behavioral psychol ogy is related to behavioral neuroscience , we can date the first researches in the area were
done in the beginning of 19th century.[17] Later, this essentially philosophical position gained strength from the success of
Skinner's early experimental work with rats and pigeons, summarized in his books The Behavior of Organisms  and Schedules of
Reinforcement.[18][19] Of particular importance was his concept of the operant response, of which the canonical example was the
rat's lever-press. In contrast with the idea of a physiological or reflex response, an operant is a class of structurally distinct but
functionally equivalent responses. For example, while a rat might press a lever with its left paw or its right paw or its tail, all of
these responses operate on the world  in the same way and have a common consequence. Operants are often thought of as species
of responses, where the individuals differ but the class coheres in its function-shared consequences with operants and
reproductive success with species. This is a clear distinction between Skinner's theory and S–R theory .
Skinner's empirical work expanded on earlier research on trial-and-error  learning by researchers such as Thorndike and Guthrie
with both conceptual reformulations—Thorndike's notion of a stimulus-response "association" or "connection" was abandoned;
and methodological ones—the use of the "free operant", so-called because the animal was now permitted to respond at its own
rate rather than in a series of trials determined by the experimenter procedures. With this method, Skinner carried out substantial
experimental work on the effects of different schedules and rates of reinforcement on the rates of operant responses made by rats
and pigeons. He achieved remarkable success in training animals to perform unexpected responses, to emit large numbers of
responses, and to demonstrate many empirical regularities at the purely behavioral level. This lent some credibility to his
conceptual analysis. It is largely his conceptual analysis that made his work much more rigorous than his peers, a point which can
be seen clearly in his seminal work Are Theories of Learning Necessary?  in which he criticizes what he viewed to be theoretical
weaknesses then common in the study of psychology. An important descendant of the experimental analysis of behavior is the
Society for Quantitative Analysis of Behavior .[20][21]
As Skinner turned from experimental work to concentrate on the philosophical underpinnings of a science of behavior, his
attention turned to human language with his 1957 book Verbal Behavior[22] and other language-related publications;[23] Verbal
Behavior  laid out a vocabulary and theory for functional analysis of verbal behavior, and was strongly criticized in a review by
Noam Chomsky .[24][25]
Skinner did not respond in detail but claimed that Chomsky failed to understand his ideas,[26] and the disagreements between the
two and the theories involved have been further discussed.[27][28][29][30][31][32] Innateness theory , which has been heavily
critiqued,[33][34] is opposed to behaviorist theory which claims that language is a set of habits that can be acquired by means of
conditioning.[35][36][37] According to some, the behaviorist account is a process which would be too slow to explain a phenomenon
as complicated as language learning. What was important for a behaviorist's analysis of human behavior was not language
acquisition  so much as the interaction between language and overt behavior. In an essay republished in his 1969 book
Contingencies of Reinforcement ,[23] Skinner took the view that humans could construct linguistic stimuli that would then acquire
control over their behavior in the same way that external stimuli could. The possibility of such "instructional control" over
behavior meant that contingencies of reinforcement would not always produce the same effects on human behavior as they
reliably do in other animals. The focus of a radical behaviorist analysis of human behavior therefore shifted to an attempt to
understand the interaction betwee n instructional control and contingency control, and also to understand the behavioral
processes that determine what instructions are constructed and what control they acquire over behavior. Recently, a new line of
behavioral research on language was started under the name of relational frame theory .[38][39][40][41]Modern-day theory: radical behaviorism
Experimental and conceptual innovations
Relation to language
B. F. Skinner's book Verbal Behavior  (1957) does not quite emphasize on language development, but to understand human
behavior. Additionally, his work serves in understanding social interactions in the child's early developmental stages focusing on
the topic of caregiver-infant interaction.[42] Skinner's functional analysis of verbal behavior terminology and theories is
commonly used to understand the relationship between language development but was primarily designed to describe behaviors
of interest and explain the cause of those behaviors.[42] Noam Chomsky , an American linguistic professor, has criticized and
questioned Skinner's theories about the possible suggestion of parental tutoring in language development. However, there is a
lack of supporting evidence where Skinner makes the statement.[42] Understanding language is a complex topic but can be
understood through the use of two theories: innateness and acquisition. Both theories offer a different perspective whether
language is inherently "acquired" or "learned".[43]
Operant conditioning  was developed by B.F. Skinner  in 1938 and is form of learning in which the frequency of a behavior is
controlled by consequences to change behavior.[44][18][45][46] In other words, behavior is controlled by historical consequential
contingencies, particularly reinforcement —a stimulus that increases the proba bility of performing behaviors, and punishment —a
stimulus that decreases such probability.[44] The core tools of consequences are either positive (presenting stimuli following a
response), or negative (withdrawn stimuli following a response).[47]
The following descriptions explains the concepts of four common types of consequences in operant conditioning:[48]
Positive reinforcement: Providing a stimulus that an individual enjoys, seeks, or craves, in order to reinforce desired behaviors.[49]
For example, when a person is teaching a dog to sit, they pair the command "sit" with a treat. The treat is the positive reinforcement
to the behavior of sitting. The key to making positive reinforcement effect is to reward the behavior immediately.
Negative reinforcement: Increases the frequency of a behavior, but the behavior results from removing unpleasant or unwanted
stimulus.[44] For example, a child hates being nagged (negative) to clean his room (behavior) which increases the frequency of the
child cleaning his room to prevent his mother from nagging. Another example would be putting on sunscreen (behavior) before
going outside to prevent sunburn (negative).
Positive punishment: Providing a stimulus that an individual does not desire to decrease undesired behaviors. For example, if a child
engages in an undesired behavior, then parents may spank (stimulus) the child to correct their behavior.
Negative punishment: Removing a stimulus that an individual desires in order to decrease undesired behaviors. An example of this
would be grounding a child for failing a test. Grounding in this example is taking away the child's ability to play video games. As
long as it is clear that the ability to play video games was taken away because they failed a test, this is negative punishment. The key
here is the connection to the behavior and the result of the behavior.[50]
A classical experiment in operant conditioning, for example, is the Skinner Box, "puzzle box" or operant conditioning chamber  to
test the effects of operant conditioning principles on rats, cats and other species. From this experiment, he discovered that the rats
learned very effectively if they were rewarded frequently with food. Skinn er also found that he could shape  (create new behavior)
the rats' behavior through the use of rewards, which could, in turn, be applied to human learning as well.
Skinner's model was based on the premise that reinforcement is used for the desired actions or responses while punishment was
used to stop the responses of the undesired actions that are not. This theory proved that humans or animals will repeat any action
that leads to a positive outcome, and avoid any action that leads to a negative outcome. The experiment with the pigeons showed
that a positive outcome leads to learned behavior since the pigeon learned to peck the disc in return for the reward of food.
These historical consequential contingencies subsequently lead to (ante cedent) stimulus control , but in contrast to respondent
conditioning where antecedent stimuli elicit reflexive behavior, operant behavior is only emitted and therefore does not force its
occurrence. It includes the following controlling stimuli:[48]
Discriminative stimulus (Sd): An antecedent stimulus that increases the chance of the organism engaging in a behavior. One
example of this occurred in Skinner's laboratory. Whenever the green light (Sd) appeared, it signaled the pigeon to perform the
behavior of pecking because it learned in the past that each time it pecked, food was presented (the positive reinforcing stimulus).
Stimulus delta (S-delta): An antecedent stimulus that signals the organism not to perform a behavior since it was extinguished or
punished in the past. One notable instance of this occurs when a person stops their car immediately after the traffic light turns red
(S-delta). However, the person could decide to drive through the red light, but subsequently receive a speeding ticket (the positive
punishing stimulus), so this behavior will potentially not reoccur following the presence of the S-delta.
Although operant conditioning  plays the largest role in discussions of behavioral mechanisms, respondent conditioning  (also
called Pavlovian or classical conditioning) is also an important behavior-analytic process that needs not refer to mental or other
internal processes. Pavlov's experiments with dogs provide the most familiar example of the classical conditioning procedure. In
the beginning, the dog was provided meat (unconditioned stimulus, UCS , naturally elicit a response that is not controlled) to eat,
resulting in increased salivation (unconditioned response, UCR, which means that a response is naturally caused by UCS).
Afterward, a bell ring was presented  together with food to the dog. Although bell ring was a neutral stimulus (NS, meaning that
the stimulus did not have any effect), dog would start to salivate when only hearing a bell ring after a number of pairings.
Eventually, the neutral stimulus (bell ring) became conditioned. Therefore, salivation was elicited as a conditioned response (the
response same as the unconditioned response), pairing up with meat—the conditioned stimulus)[51] Although Pavlov proposedEducation
Operant conditioning
Respondent conditioning
some tentative physiological processes that might be involved in classical conditioning, these have not been confirmed.[52] The
idea of classical conditioning helped behaviorist John Watson discover the key mechanism behind how humans acquire the
behaviors that they do, which was to find a natural reflex that produces the response being considered.
Watson 's "Behaviorist Manifesto" has three aspects that deserve special recognition: one is that psychology should be purely
objective, with any interpretation of conscious experience being removed, thus leading to psychology as the "science of behavior";
the second one is that the goals of psychology should be to predict and control behavior (as opposed to describe and explain
conscious mental states); the third one is that there is no notable distinction between human and non-human behavior. Following
Darwin's theory of evolution, this would simply mean that human behavior is just a more complex version in respect to behavior
displayed by other species.[53]
Behaviorism is a psychological movement that can be contrasted with philosophy of mind .[54][55][56] The basic premise of
behaviorism is that the study of behavior should be a natural science , such as chemistry  or physics .[57][58] Initially behaviorism
rejected any reference to hypothetical inner states of organisms as causes for their behavior, but B.F. Skinner's radical
behaviorism reintroduced reference to inner states and also advocated for the study of thoughts and feelings as behaviors subject
to the same mechanisms as external behavior.[57][58] Behaviorism takes a functional view of behavior. According to Edmund
Fantino  and colleagues: "Behavior analysis has much to offer the study of phenomena normally dominated by cognitive and social
psychologists. We hope that successful application of behavioral theory and methodology will not only shed light on central
problems in judgment and choice but will also generate greater appreciation of the behavioral approach."[59]
Behaviorist sentiments are not uncommon within philosophy of language  and analytic philosophy . It is sometimes argued that
Ludwig Wittgenstein  defended a logical behaviorist  position[10] (e.g., the beetle in a box argument). In logical positivism  (as held,
e.g., by Rudolf Carnap[10] and Carl Hempel ),[10] the meaning of psychological statements are their verification conditions, which
consist of performed overt behavior. W. V. O. Quine  made use of a type of behaviorism,[10] influenced by some of Skinner's ideas,
in his own work on language. Quine's work in semantics differed substa ntially from the empiricist semantics of Carnap which he
attempted to create an alternative to, couching his semantic theory in references to physical objects rather than sensations.
Gilbert Ryle  defended a distinct strain of philosophical behaviorism, sketched in his book The Concept of Mind .[10] Ryle's central
claim was that instances of dualism frequently represented "category mistakes ", and hence that they were really
misunderstandings of the use of ordinary language. Daniel Dennett  likewise acknowledges himself to be a type of behaviorist,[60]
though he offers extensive criticism of radical behaviorism and refutes Skinner's rejection of the value of intentional idioms and
the possibility of free will.[61]
This is Dennett's main point in "Skinner Skinned". Dennett argues that there is a crucial difference between explaining
and explaining away... If our explana tion of apparently rational behavior turns out to be extremely simple, we may want
to say that the behavior was not really rational after all. But if the explanation is very complex and intricate, we may want
to say not that the behavior is not rational, but that we now have a better understanding of what rationality consists in.
(Compare: if we find out how a computer program solves problems in linear algebra, we don't say it's not really solving
them, we just say we know how it does it. On the other hand, in cases like Weizenbaum's  ELIZA  program, the
explanation of how the computer carries on a conversation is so simple that the right thing to say seems to be that the
machine isn't really carrying on a conversation, it's just a trick.)
— Curtis Brown, "Behaviorism: Skinner and Dennett", Philosophy of Mind[62]
Law of effect: Although Edward Thorndike's methodology mainly dealt with reinforcing observable behavior, it viewed cognitive
antecedents as the causes of behavior,[63] and was theoretically much more similar to the cognitive-behavior therapies than classical
(methodological) or modern-day (radical) behaviorism. Nevertheless, Skinner's operant conditioning was heavily influenced by the
Law of Effect's principle of reinforcement.[63]
Trace conditioning: Akin to B.F. Skinner's radical behaviorism, it is a respondent conditioning technique based on Ivan Pavlov's
concept of a "memory trace" in which the observer recalls the conditioned stimulus (CS), with the memory or recall being the
unconditioned response (UR). There is also a time delay between the CS and unconditioned stimulus (US), causing the conditioned
response (CR)—particularly the reflex—to be faded over time.[63] According to Marchand,[64] the hippocampus is a part of the
cognitive processes during trace conditioning and other forms of classical conditioning in two ways: needing to overcome stimuli or
due to mre activity from complex challenges. However, results may vary due to the nature of the task and the design of the
experiment .
Skinner's view of behavior is most often characterized as a "molecular" view of behavior; that is, behavior can be decomposed into
atomistic parts or molecules. This view is inconsistent with Skinner's complete description of behavior as delineated in other
works, including his 1981 article "Selection by Consequences".[65] Skinner proposed that a complete account of behavior requires
understanding of selection history at three levels: biology  (the natural selection  or phylogeny  of the animal); behavior (the
reinforcement history or ontogeny of the behavioral repertoire of the animal); and for some species, culture  (the cultural practices
of the social group to which the anim al belongs). This whole organism then interacts with its environment. Molecular behaviorists
use notions from melioration theory , negative power function discounting  or additive versions of negative power functionIn philosophy
Law of effect and trace conditioning
Molecular versus molar behaviorism
discounting.[66] According to Moore,[67] the perseverance in a molecular examination of behavior may be sign of a desire for an
in-depth understanding, maybe to identify any underlying mechanism or components that contribute to comples actions. This
strategy might involve elements, procedure, or variables that contribute to behaviorism.
Molar behaviorists, such as Howard Rachlin , Richard Herrnstein , and William Baum, argue that behavior cannot be understood
by focusing on events in the moment. That is, they argue that behavior is best understood as the ultimate product of an organism's
history and that molecular behaviorists are committing a fallacy by inventing fictitious proximal causes for behavior. Molar
behaviorists argue that standard molecular constructs, such as "associative strength", are better replaced by molar variables such
as rate of reinforcement .[68] Thus, a molar behaviorist would describe "loving someone" as a pattern of loving behavior  over time;
there is no isolated, proximal cause of loving behavior, only a history of behaviors (of which the current behavior might be an
example) that can be summarized as "love".
Skinner's radical behaviorism has been highly successful experimentally, revealing new phenomena with new methods, but
Skinner's dismissal of theory limited its development. Theoretical behaviorism[12] recognized that a historical system, an
organism, has a state as well as sensitivity to stimuli and the ability to emit responses. Indeed, Skinner himself acknowledged the
possibility of what he called "latent" responses in humans, even though he neglected to extend this idea to rats and pigeons.[69]
Latent responses constitute a repertoire, from which operant reinforcement can select. Theoretical behaviorism links between the
brain and the behavior that provid es a real understanding of the behavior, rather than a mental presumption of how brain-
behavior relates.[70] The theoretical concept of behaviorism are blended with knowledge of mental structure such as memory and
expectancies associated with inflex ible behaviorist stances that have traditionally forbidden the examination of the mental
state.[71] Because of its flexibility, theoretical behaviorism permits the cognitive process to have an impact on behavior.
From its inception, behavior analysis has centered its examination on cultural occurrences (Skinner , 1953,[72] 1961,[73] 1971,[74]
1974[75]). Nevertheless, the methods used to tackle these occurrences have evolved. Initially, culture was perceived as a factor
influencing behavior, later becomin g a subject of study in itself.[76] This shift prompted research into group practices and the
potential for significant behavior al transformations on a larger scale. Following Glenn's (1986) influential work,
"Metacontingencies in Walden Two ",[77]  numerous research endeavors exploring behavior analysis in cultural contexts have
centered around the concept of the metacontingency. Glenn (2003) posited that understanding the origins and development of
cultures necessitates delving beyond evolutionary and behavioral principles governing species characteristics and individual
learned behaviors requires analysis at a major level.[78]
With the fast growth of big behavioral data and applications, behavior analysis is ubiquitous. Understanding behavior from the
informatics and computing perspect ive becomes increasingly critical for in-depth understanding of what, why and how behaviors
are formed, interact, evolve, change and affect business and decision. Behavior informatics  and behavior computing  deeply
explore behavior intelligence and behavior insights from the informatics and computing perspectives.
Pavel et al. (2015) found that in the realm of healthcare  and health psychology , substantial evidence supports the notion that
personalized health interventions yield greater effectiveness compared to standardized approaches. Additionally, researchers
found that recent progress in sensor and communication technology, coupled with data analysis and computational modeling,
holds significant potential in revolutionizing interventions aimed at changing health behavior. Simultaneous advancements in
sensor and communication technology, alongside the field of data science , have now made it possible to comprehensively measure
behaviors occurring in real-life settings. These two elements, when combined with advancements in computational modeling,
have laid the groundwork for the emerging discipline known as behavioral informatics . Behavioral informatics represents  a
scientific and engineering domain  encompassing behavior tracking,  evaluation, computational modeling, deduction, and
intervention.[79]
In the second half of the 20th century, behaviorism was largely eclipsed as a result of the cognitive revolution .[80][81] This shift
was due to radical behaviorism being  highly criticized for not examining  mental processes, and this led to the development of the
cognitive therapy  movement. In the mid-20th century, three main influences arose that would inspire and shape cognitive
psychology as a formal school of thought:
Noam Chomsky's 1959 critique of behaviorism, and empiricism more generally, initiated what would come to be known as the
"cognitive revolution".[82]
Developments in computer science would lead to parallels being drawn between human thought and the computational
functionality of computers, opening entirely new areas of psychological thought. Allen Newell and Herbert Simon spent years
developing the concept of artificial intelligence (AI) and later worked with cognitive psychologists regarding the implications of AI.
The effective result was more of a framework conceptualization of mental functions with their counterparts in computers (memory,
storage, retrieval, etc.).
Formal recognition of the field involved the establishment of research institutions such as George Mandler's Center for Human
Information Processing in 1964. Mandler described the origins of cognitive psychology in a 2002 article in the Journal of the History
[]Theoretical behaviorism
Behavior analysis and culture
Behavior informatics and behavior computing
Criticisms and limitations