Epistemology
Epistemology  is the branch of philosophy  that examines the nature, origin, and limits of knowledge . Also called the theory of
knowledge , it explores different types of knowledge, such as propositional knowledge  about facts, practical knowledge  in the
form of skills, and knowledge by acquaintance  as a familiarity through experience . Epistemologists study the concepts of belief ,
truth , and justification  to understand the nature of knowledge. To discover how knowledge arises, they investigate sources of
justification, such as perception , introspection , memory , reason , and testimony .
The school of skepticism  questions the human ability to attain knowledge, while fallibilism  says that knowledge is never certain.
Empiricists  hold that all knowledge comes from sense experience, whereas rationalists  believe that some knowledge does not
depend on it. Coherentists  argue that a belief is justified if it is consistent with other beliefs. Foundationalists , by contrast,
maintain that the justification of basic beliefs does not depend on other beliefs. Internalism and externalism  debate whether
justification is determined solely by mental states  or also by external circumstances.
Separate branches of epistemology focus on knowledge in specific fields, like scientific, mathematical, moral, and religious
knowledge. Naturalized epistemology  relies on empirical methods and discoveries, whereas formal epistemology  uses formal tools
from logic . Social epistemology  investigates the communal aspect of knowledge, and historical epistemology  examines its
historical conditions. Epistemology is closely related to psychology , which infers the beliefs people hold from their words and
actions, while epistemology studies the norms governing the evaluation of beliefs. It also intersects with fields such as decision
theory , education , and anthropology .
Early reflections on the nature, sources, and scope of knowledge are foun d in ancient Greek , Indian , and Chinese philosophy . The
relation between reason and faith  was a central topic in the medieval period . The modern era was characterized by the contrasting
perspectives of empiricism and rationalism. Epistemologists in the 20th century examined the components, structure, and value
of knowledge while integrating insights from the natural sciences  and linguistics .
Epistemology is the philosophical study of knowledge  and related concepts, such as justification . Also called theory of
knowledge ,[a] it examines the nature  and types of knowledge. It further investigates the sources of knowledge, like perception ,
inference , and testimony , to understand how knowledge is created. Another set of questions concerns the extent and limits of
knowledge, addressing what people can and cannot know.[2] Central concepts in epistemology include belief , truth , evidence , and
reason .[3] As one of the main branches of philosophy, epistemology stands alongside fields like ethics , logic , and metaphysics .[4]
The term can also refer specific positions of philosophers within this branch, as in Plato 's epistemology and Immanuel Kant 's
epistemology.[5]
Epistemology explores how people should acquire beliefs. It determines which beliefs or forms of belief acquisition meet the
standards or epistemic goals of knowledge and which ones fail, thereby providing an evaluation of beliefs. The fields of psychology
and cognitive sociology  are also interested in beliefs and related cognitive processes, but examine them from a different
perspective. Unlike epistemology, they study the beliefs people actually have and how people acquire them instead of examining
the evaluative norms of these processes.[6] In this regard, epistemology is a normative  discipline,[b] whereas psychology and
cognitive sociology are descriptive disciplines.[8][c] Epistemology is relevant to many descriptive and normative disciplines, such
as the other branches of philosophy and the sciences, by exploring the principles of how they may arrive at knowledge.[11]
The word epistemology  comes from the ancient Greek  terms ἐπιστήµη  (episteme , meaning knowledge  or understanding ) and
λόγος  (logos , meaning study of or reason ), literally , the study of knowledge. Despite its ancient roots, the word itself was coined
only in the 19th century to designate this field as a distinct branch of philosophy.[12][d]
Epistemologists examine several foundational concepts to understand their essences and rely on them to formulate theories.
Various epistemological disagreements have their roots in disputes about the nature and function of these concepts, like the
controversies surrounding the definition of knowledge and the role of justification  in it.[17]
Knowledge is an awareness, familiarity, understanding, or skill. Its vario us forms all involve a cognitive success through which a
person establishes epistemic contact with reality.[18] Epistemologists typically understand knowledge as an aspect of individ uals,
generally as a cognitive mental state  that helps them understand, interpret, and interact with the world. Whil e this core sense is of
particular interest to epistemologists, the term also has other meanings. For example, the epistemology of groups examines
knowledge as a characteristic of a group of people who share ideas.[19] The term can also refer to information  stored in documents
and computers.[20]
Knowledge contrasts with ignorance , often simply defined as the absence of knowledge. Knowledge is usually accompanied by
ignorance because people rarely have complete knowledge of a field, forcing them to rely on incomplete or uncertain information
when making decisions.[21] Even though many forms of ignorance can be mitigated through education and research, certain limitsDefinition
Central concepts
Knowledge
Bertrand Russell originated the
distinction between propositional
knowledge and knowledge by
acquaintance.[26]
The analytic–synthetic distinction
has its roots in the philosophy of
Immanuel Kant.[37]to human understanding result in inevitable ignorance.[22] Some limitations are inherent in the human cognitive faculties
themselves, such as the inability to know facts too complex for the human mind  to conceive.[23] Others depend on external
circumstances when no access to the relevant information exists.[24]
Epistemologists disagree on how much people know, for example, whether fallible beliefs can amount to knowledge or whether
absolute certainty is required. The most stringent position is taken by radical skeptics , who argue that there is no knowledge at
all.[25]
Epistemologists distinguish between different types of knowledge.[27] Their primary interest is in
knowledge of facts, called propositional knowledge .[28] It is theoretical  knowledge that can be
expressed in declarative sentences  using a that-clause, like "Ravi knows that kangaroos hop". For
this reason, it is also called knowledge-that .[29][e] Epistemologists often understand it as a
relation  between a knower and a known proposition , in the case above between the pers on Ravi
and the proposition "kangaroos hop".[30] It is use-independent since it is not tied to one specific
purpose, unlike practical knowledge. It is a mental representation that embodies concepts and
ideas to reflect reality.[31] Because of its theoretical nature, it is typically held that only creatures
with highly developed minds, such as humans, possess propositional knowledge.[32]
Propositional knowledge contrasts with non-propositional knowledge in the form of knowledge-
how  and knowledge by acquaintance .[33] Knowledge-how is a practical ability or skill, like
knowing how to read or how to prepare lasagna .[34] It is usually tied to a specific goal and not
mastered in the abstract without concrete practice.[35] To know something by acquaintance
means to have an immediate familiarity with or awareness of it, usually as a result of direct
experiential contact. Examples are "familiarity with the city of Perth ", "knowing the taste of
tsampa ", and "knowing Marta Vieira da Silva  personally".[36]
Another influential distinction in epistemology is between a posteriori  and a priori
knowledge.[38][f] A posteriori  knowledge is knowledge of empirical  facts based on sensory
experience, like "seeing that the sun is shining" and "smelling that a piece of meat has gone
bad".[40] This type of knowledge is associated with the empirical science and everyday affairs. A
priori  knowledge, by contrast, pertains to non-empirical facts and does not depend on evidence
from sensory experience, like knowing that . It belongs to fields such as mathematics
and logic .[41] The distinction between a posteriori  and a priori  knowledge is central to the debate
between empiricists  and rationalists  regarding whether all knowledge depends on sensory
experience.[42]
A closely related contrast is between analytic and synthetic truths . A sentence is analytically true
if its truth depends only on the meanings of the words it uses. For instance, the sentence "all
bachelors are unmarried" is analytically true because the word "bachelor" already includes the
meaning "unmarried". A sentence is synthetically true if its truth depend s on additional facts. For
example, the sentence "snow is white" is synthetically true because its truth depends on the color
of snow in addition to the meanings of the words snow  and white . A priori  knowledge is
primarily associated with analytic sentences, whereas a posteriori  knowledge is primarily
associated with synthetic sentences. However, it is controversial whether this is true for all cases. Some philosophers, such as
Willard Van Orman Quine , reject the distinction, saying that there are no analytic truths.[43]
The analysis of knowledge is the attempt to identify the essential components  or conditions of all and only  propositional
knowledge states. According to the so-called traditional analysis ,[g] knowledge has three components: it is a belief that is justified
and true.[45] In the second half of the 20th century, this view was challenged by a series of thought experiments  aiming to show
that some justified true beliefs do not amount to knowledge.[46] In one of them, a person is unaware of all the fake barns  in their
area. By coincidence, they stop in front of the only real barn and form  a justified true belief that it is a real barn.[47] Many
epistemologists agree that this is not knowledge because the justification  is not directly relevant to the truth.[48] More specifically,
this and similar counterexamples involve some form of epistemic luck, that is, a cognitive success that results from fortuitous
circumstances rather than competence.[49]
Following these thought experiments , philosophers proposed various alternative definitions of knowledge  by modifying or
expanding the traditional analysis.[50] According to one view, the known fact has to cause the belief in the right way.[51] Another
theory states that the belief is the product of a reliable belief formation process.[52] Further approaches require that the person
would not have the belief if it was false,[53] that the belief is not inferred from a falsehood,[54] that the justification cannot be
undermined ,[55] or that the belief is infallible .[56] There is no consensus on which of the proposed modifications and
reconceptualizations is correct.[57] Some philosophers, such as Timothy Williamson , reject the basic assumption underl ying the
analysis of knowledge by arguing that propositional knowledge is a unique state  that cannot be dissected into simpler
components.[58]Types
Analysis
The so-called traditional analysis says that
knowledge is justified true belief. Edmund
Gettier tried to show that some justified
true beliefs do not amount to
knowledge.[50]The value of knowledge is the worth it holds by expanding understan ding and guiding
action. Knowledge can have instrumental value  by helping a person achieve their goals.[59]
For example, knowledge of a disease  helps a doctor cure their patient.[60] The usefulness
of a known fact depends on the circumstances. Knowledge of some facts may have little to
no uses, like memorizing random phone numbers from an outdated phon e book.[61] Being
able to assess the value of knowledge matters in choosing what informati on to acquire and
share. It affects decisions like which  subjects to teach at school and how to allocate funds
to research projects.[62]
Epistemologists are particularly interested in whether knowledge is more valuable than a
mere true opinion.[63] Knowledge and true opinion often have a similar usefulness since
both accurately represent reality. For example, if a person wants to go to Larissa , a true
opinion about the directions can guide them as effectively as knowledge .[64] Considering
this problem, Plato proposed that knowledge is better because it is more stable.[65]
Another suggestion focuses on practical reasoning , arguing that people put more trust in knowledge than in mere true opinions
when drawing conclusions and deciding what to do.[66] A different response says that knowledge has intrinsic value in addition to
instrumental value. This view asserts that knowledge is always valuable , whereas true opinion is only valuable in circumstances
where it is useful.[67]
Beliefs are mental states about what  is the case, like believing that snow is white or that God exists .[68] In epistemology, they are
often understood as subjective attitudes that affirm or deny a proposition , which can be expressed in a declarative sentence . For
instance, to believe that snow is white is to affirm the proposition  "snow is white". According to this view, beliefs are
representations of what the universe is like. They are stored in memory and retrieved when actively thinking about reality or
deciding how to act.[69] A different view understands beliefs as behavioral patterns or dispositions  to act rather than as
representational items stored in the mind. According to this perspectiv e, to believe that there is mineral water in the fridge is
nothing more than a group of dispositions related to mineral water and the fridge. Examples are the dispositions to answer
questions about the presence of mineral water affirmatively and to go to the fridge when thirsty.[70] Some theorists deny the
existence of beliefs, saying that this concept borrowed from folk psychology  oversimplifies much more complex psychological or
neurological processes.[71] Beliefs are central to various epistemological debates, which cover their status as a component of
propositional knowledge, the questi on of whether people have control over and responsibility for their beliefs , and the issue of
whether beliefs have degrees, called credences .[72]
As propositional attitudes, beliefs are true or false depending on whether  they affirm a true or a false proposition.[73] According to
the correspondence theory of truth , to be true means to stand in the right relation to the world by accurately describing what it is
like. This means that truth is objective: a belief is true if it corresponds to a fact.[74] The coherence theory of truth  says that a belief
is true if it belongs to a coherent system of beliefs. A result of this view is that truth is relative since it depends on other beliefs.[75]
Further theories of truth  include pragmatist , semantic , pluralist , and deflationary theories .[76] Truth plays a central role in
epistemology as a goal of cognitive processes and an attribute of propositional knowledge.[77]
In epistemology, justification is a property of beliefs that meet certain norms about what a person should believe. According to a
common view, this means that the person has sufficient reasons for holding this belief because they have information that
supports it.[78] Another view states that a belief is justified if it is formed by a reliable belief formation process, such as
perception.[79] The terms reasonable , warranted , and supported  are sometimes used as synonyms of the word justified .[80]
Justification distinguishes well-founded beliefs from superstition  and lucky guesses.[81] However, it does not guarantee truth. For
example, a person with strong but misleading evidence may form a justified belief that is false.[82]
Epistemologists often identify justifi cation as a key component of knowledge.[83] Usually, they are not only interested in whether
a person has a sufficient reason to hold a belief, known as propositional justification , but also in whether the person holds the
belief because or based on[h] this reason, known as doxastic justification . For example, if a person has sufficient reason to believe
that a neighborhood is dangerous but forms this belief based on supers tition then they have propositional justification but lack
doxastic justification.[85]
Sources of justification are ways or cognitive capacities through whic h people acquire justification. Often-discussed sources
include perception , introspection , memory , reason , and testimony , but there is no universal agreement to what extent they all
provide valid justification.[86] Perception relies on sensory organs  to gain empirical information. Dist inct forms of perception
correspond to different physical stimuli, such as visual , auditory , haptic , olfactory , and gustatory  perception.[87] Perception is not
merely the reception of sense impressions but an active process that selects, organizes, and interprets sensory signals .[88]
Introspection is a closely related process focused on internal mental states  rather than external physical objec ts. For example,
seeing a bus at a bus station belongs to perception while feeling tired belongs to introspection.[89]
Rationalists understand reason as a source of justification for non-empirical facts, explaining how people can know about
mathematical, logical, and conceptu al truths. Reason is also responsible for inferential knowledge, in which one or more beliefs
serve as premises to support another belief.[90] Memory depends on information provided by other sources, which it retains andValue
Belief and truth
Justification
Sources
recalls, like remembering a phone number perceived earlier.[91] Justification by testimony relies on information one person
communicates to another person. This can happen by talking to each other but can also occur in other forms, like a letter, a
newspaper, and a blog.[92]
Rationality  is closely related to justification and the terms rational belief  and justified belief  are sometimes used interchangeably .
However, rationality has a wider scope that encompasses both a theore tical side, covering beliefs, and a practical side, covering
decisions , intentions , and actions .[93] There are different conceptions about what it means for something to be rational. According
to one view, a mental state is rational if it is based on or responsive to good reasons. Another view emphasizes the role of
coherence, stating that rationality requires that the different mental state s of a person are consistent  and support each other.[94] A
slightly different approach holds that rationality is about achieving certain goals. Two goals of theoretical rationality are accuracy
and comprehensiveness, meaning that a person has as few false beliefs and as many true beliefs as possible.[95]
Epistemologists rely on the concept of epistemic norms as criteria to assess the cognitive quality of beliefs, like their justification
and rationality. They distinguish between deontic norms, which prescribe  what people should believe, and axiological  norms,
which identify the goals and values  of beliefs.[96] Epistemic norms are closely linked to intellectual or epistemic virtues , which are
character traits like open-mindedness  and conscientiousness . Epistemic virtues help individuals form true beliefs and acquire
knowledge. They contrast with epistemic vices and act as foundational concepts of virtue epistemology .[97][i]
Epistemologists understand evidence  for a belief as information that favors or supports it. They conceptualize evidence primarily
in terms of mental states, such as sensory impressions or other known propositions. But in a wider sense, it can also include
physical objects, like bloodstains examined by forensic analysts  or financial records studied by investigative journalists.[99]
Evidence is often understood in terms of probability : evidence for a belief makes it more likely that the belief is true.[100] A
defeater  is evidence against a belief or evid ence that undermines another piece of evidence. For instance, witness testimony
linking a suspect to a crime is eviden ce of their guilt, while an alibi  is a defeater.[101] Evidentialists  analyze justification in terms of
evidence by asserting that for a belief to be justified, it needs to rest on adequate evidence.[102]
The presence of evidence usually affects doubt  and certainty , which are subjective attitudes toward propositions that differ
regarding their level of confidence. Doubt involves questioning the valid ity or truth of a proposition. Certainty, by contrast, is a
strong affirmative conviction, indica ting an absence of doubt about the proposition's truth. Doubt and certainty are central to
ancient Greek skepticism and its goal of establishing that no belief is immune to doubt. They are also crucial in attempts to find a
secure foundation of all knowledge, such as René Descartes ' foundationalist  epistemology.[103]
While propositional knowledge is the main topic in epistemology, some theorists focus on understanding  instead. Understanding
is a more holistic notion that involves a wider grasp of a subject. To understand something, a person requires awareness of how
different things are connected and why they are the way they are. For example, knowledge of isolated facts memorized from a
textbook does not amount to understanding. According to one view, understanding is a unique epistemic good that, unlike
propositional knowledge, is always intrinsically valuable.[104] Wisdom  is similar in this regard and is sometimes considered the
highest epistemic good. It encompasses a reflective understanding with practical applications, helping people grasp and evaluate
complex situations and lead a good life.[105]
In epistemology, knowledge ascription is the act of attributing knowledg e to someone, expressed in sentences like "Sarah knows
that it will rain today".[106] According to invariantism, knowledge ascriptions have fixed standards across different contexts.
Contextualists , by contrast, argue that knowledge ascriptions are context-dependent. From this perspective, Sarah may know
about the weather in the context of an everyday conversation even though  she is not sufficiently informed to know it in the context
of a rigorous meteorological  debate.[107] Contrastivism , another view, argues that knowl edge ascriptions are comparative,
meaning that to know something involves distinguishing it from relevant alternatives. For example, if a person spots a bird in the
garden, they may know that it is a sparrow rather than an eagle, but they may not know that it is a sparrow rather than an
indistinguishable sparrow hologram.[108]
Philosophical skepticism  questions the human ability to attain knowledge by challenging the foundations upon which knowledge
claims rest. Some skeptics limit their criticism to specific domains of knowledge. For example, religious skeptics  say that it is
impossible to know about the existen ce of deities or the truth of other religious doctrines. Similarly, moral skeptics challenge the
existence of moral knowledge and metaphysical skeptics say that humans cannot know ultimate reality.[109] External world
skepticism questions knowledge of external facts,[110 ] whereas skepticism about other minds  doubts knowledge of the mental
states of others.[111]
Global skepticism is the broadest form of skepticism, asserting that there is no knowledge in any domain.[112 ] In ancient
philosophy , this view was embraced by academic skeptics , whereas Pyrrhonian skeptics  recommended the suspension of belief  to
attain tranquility .[113 ] Few epistemologists have explicitly defended global skepticism. The influence of this position stems from
attempts by other philosophers to show that their theory overcomes the challenge of skepticism. For example, René Descartes
used methodological doubt  to find facts that cannot be doubted.[114 ]Other concepts
Major schools of thought
Skepticism and fallibilism
John Locke and David Hume shaped the philosophy of
empiricism.[122]
Diagram of foundationalism, coherentism, and infinitism with
arrows symbolizing support between beliefs. According to
foundationalism, some basic beliefs are justified without support
from other beliefs. According to coherentism, justification requires
that beliefs mutually support each other. According to infinitism,
justification requires that beliefs form infinite support chains.[128]One consideration in favor of global skepticism is the dream argument . It starts from the observation that, while people are
dreaming, they are usually unaware of this. This inability to distinguish between dream and regular experience is used to argue
that there is no certain knowledge since a person can never be sure that they are not dreaming.[115][j] Some critics assert that
global skepticism is self-refuting  because denying the existence of knowledge is itself a knowledge claim. Another objection says
that the abstract reasoning leading to skepticism is not convincing enough to overrule common sense.[117]
Fallibilism is another response to skepticism.[118 ] Fallibilists agree with skeptics that absolute certainty is impossible. They reject
the assumption that knowledge requires absolute certainty, leading them to the conclusion that fallible knowledge exists.[119 ] They
emphasize the need to keep an open and inquisitive mind, acknowledging that doubt can never be fully excluded, even for well-
established knowledge claims like thoroughly tested scientific theories.[120]
Epistemic relativism is related to skepticism but differs in that it does not question the existence of knowledge in general. Instead,
epistemic relativists only reject the notion of universal epistemic standards or absolute principles that apply equally to everyone.
This means that what a person knows depends on subjective criteria or social conventions used to assess epistemic status.[121]
The debate between empiricism and rationalism centers on the origins of
human knowledge. Empiricism emphasizes that sense experience  is the
primary source of all knowledge. Some empiricists illustrate this view by
describing the mind as a blank slate  that only develops ideas about the
external world through the sense data received from the sensory organs.
According to them, the mind can attain various additional insight s by
comparing impressions, combining them, generalizing to form more abstract
ideas, and deducing new conclusions from them. Empiricists say that all
these mental operations depend on sensory material and do not function on
their own.[123]
Even though rationalists usually accept sense experience as one source of
knowledge,[k] they argue that certain forms of knowledge are directly
accessed through reason  without sense experience,[125] like knowledge of
mathematical and logical truths.[126] Some forms of rationalism state that the mind possesses inborn ideas , accessible without
sensory assistance. Others assert that there is an additional cognitive faculty, sometimes called rational intuition , through which
people acquire nonempirical knowledge.[127] Some rationalists limit their discussion to the origin of concepts, saying that the
mind relies on inborn categories  to understand the world and organize experience.[125]
Foundationalists and coherentists disagree about the structure of
knowledge.[129][l] Foundationalism distinguishes between basic and
non-basic beliefs. A belief is basic if it is justified directly, meaning that
its validity does not depend on the support of other beliefs.[m] A belief
is non-basic if it is justified by another belief.[133 ] For example, the
belief that it rained last night is a non-basic belief if it is inferred from
the observation that the street is wet.[134 ] According to
foundationalism, basic beliefs are the foundation on which all other
knowledge is built while non-basic beliefs act as the superstructure
resting on this foundation.[133 ]
Coherentists reject the distinction between basic and non-basic beliefs,
saying that the justification of any belief depends on other beliefs. They
assert that a belief must align with other beliefs to amount to
knowledge. This occurs when beliefs are consistent and support each other. According to coherentism, justification is a holistic
aspect determined by the whole system of beliefs, which resembles an interconnected web.[135 ]
Foundherentism  is an intermediary position combining elements of both foundation alism and coherentism. It accepts the
distinction between basic and non-basic beliefs while asserting that the justification of non-basic beliefs depends on coherence
with other beliefs.[136 ]
Infinitism  presents a less common alternative perspective on the structure of knowledge. It agrees with coherentism that there are
no basic beliefs while rejecting the view that beliefs can support each other in a circular manner . Instead, it argues that beliefs
form infinite justification chains, in which each link of the chain supports the belief following it and is supported by the belief
preceding it.[137 ]
The disagreement between internalism and externalism is about the sources of justification.[139 ][n] Internalists say that
justification depends only on factors within the individual, such as perceptual experience, memories, and other beliefs. This view
emphasizes the importance of the cognitive perspective of the individual in the form of their mental states. It is commonly
associated with the idea that the relevant factors are accessible, meaning that the individual can become aware of their reasons for
holding a justified belief through introspection and reflection.[141]Empiricism and rationalism
Foundationalism and coherentism
Internalism and externalism