The normal distribution, a very common probability
density, is used extensively in inferential statistics.Statistics
Statistics  (from German : Statistik , orig.  "description of a state , a country"[1]) is the
discipline that concerns the collection, organization, analysis, interpretation, and
presentation of data .[2] In applying statistics to a scientific, industrial, or social
problem, it is conventional to begin with a statistical population  or a statistical model
to be studied. Populations can be diverse groups of people or objects such as "all
people living in a country" or "every atom composing a crystal". Statistics deals with
every aspect of data, including the planning of data collection in terms of the design
of surveys  and experiments .[3] Statistics is deeply related to subjects like physics,
chemistry, geography, geopolitics, and especially mathematics.
When census  data (comprising every member of the target population) cannot be
collected, statisticians  collect data by developing specific  experiment designs and
survey samples . Representative sampling assures that inferences and conclusions
can reasonably extend from the sample to the population as a whole. An
experimental study  involves taking measurements of the system under study,
manipulating the system, and then taking additional measurements using the same procedure to determine if the manipulation has
modified the values of the measurements. In contrast, an observational study  does not involve experimental manipulation.
Two main statistical methods are used in data analysis : descriptive statistics , which summarize data from a sample using indexes  such
as the mean  or standard deviation , and inferential statistics , which draw conclusions from data  that are subject to random variation
(e.g., observational errors, samplin g variation).[4] Descriptive statistics are most often concerned with two sets of properties of a
distribution  (sample or population): central tendency  (or location ) seeks to characterize the distributio n's central or typical value, while
dispersion  (or variability ) characterizes the extent to which members of the distribution depart from its center and each other.
Inferences made using mathematical statistics  employ the framework of probability theory , which deals with the analysis of random
phenomena.
A standard statistical procedure involves the collection of data leading to a test of the relationship  between two statistical data sets, or a
data set and synthetic data drawn from an idealized model. A hypothesis is proposed for the statistical relationship between the two data
sets, an alternative  to an idealized null hypothesis  of no relationship between two data sets. Rejecting or disproving the null hypothesis
is done using statistical tests that quantify the sense in which the null can be proven false, given the data that are used in the test.4/1/26, 2:47 AM Statistics - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Statistics 1/26
Scatter plots and line charts are used in descriptive
statistics to show the observed relationships between
different variables, here using the Iris flower data set.Working from a null hypothesis, two basic forms of error are recognized: Type I
errors  (null hypothesis is rejected when it is in fact true, giving a "false positive ") and
Type II errors  (null hypothesis fails to be rejected when it is in fact false, giving a
"false negative"). Multiple problems have come to be associated with this framework,
ranging from obtaining a sufficient sample size to specifying an adequate null
hypothesis.[4]
Statistical measurement processes are also prone to error with regard  to the data
they generate. Many of these errors are classified as random (noise) or systematic
(bias), but other types of errors (e.g., blunder, such as when an analyst reports
incorrect units) can also occur. The presence of missing data  or censoring  may result
in biased estimates, and specific techniques have been developed to address these
problems.
"Statistics is both the science of uncertainty and the technology of extracting
information from data." - featured in the International Encyclopedia of
Statistical Science.[5]
Statistics is the discipline that deals with data , facts and figures with which meaningful information is inferred. Data may represent a
numerical value, in form of quantitative data, or a label, as with qualitative data. Data may be collected, presented and summarised, in
one of two methods called descriptive statistics. Two elementary summaries of data, singularly called a statistic, are the mean and
dispersion. Whereas inferential statistics interprets data from a population sample to induce statements and predictions about a
population.[6][7][5]
Statistics is regarded as a body of science[8] or a branch of mathematics.[9] It is based on probability, a branch of mathematics that
studies random events. Statistics is considered the science of uncertainty. This arises from the ways to cope with measurement and
sampling error as well as dealing with uncertanties in modelling. Although probability and statistics were once paired together as a
single subject, they are conceptually distinct from one another. The former is based on deducing answers to specific situations from a
general theory of probability, meanwhile statistics induces statements about a population based on a data set. Statistics serves to bridge
the gap between probability and applied mathematical fields.[10][5][11]Introduction4/1/26, 2:47 AM Statistics - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Statistics 2/26
Some consider statistics to be a distinct mathematical science  rather than a branch of mathematics. While many scientific investigations
make use of data, statistics is generally concerned with the use of data in the context of uncertainty and decision-making in the face of
uncertainty.[12][13] Statistics is indexed at 62, a subclass of probability theory and stochastic processes, in the Mathematics Subject
Classification.[14] Mathematical statistics is covered in the range 276-280 of subclass QA (science > mathematics) in the Library of
Congress Classification.[15]
The word statistics ultimately comes from the Latin word Status, meaning "situation" or "condition" in society, which in late Latin
adopted the meaning "state". Derived from this, political scientist Gottfried Achenwall, coined the German word statistik (a summary of
how things stand). In 1770, the term entered the English language through German and referred to the study of political arrangements.
The term gained its modern meaning in the 1790s in John Sinclair's works.[16][17] In modern German, the term statistik is synonymous
with mathematical statistics. The term statistic, in singular form, is used to describe a function that returns its value of the same
name.[18]
When full census data cannot be collected, statisticians collect sampl e data by developing specific experiment designs  and survey
samples . Statistics itself also provides tools for prediction and forecasting through statistical models .
To use a sample as a guide to an entire population, it is important that it truly represents the overall population. Representative
sampling  ensures that inferences and conclusi ons can safely be extended from the sample to the population as a whole. A major problem
lies in determining the extent to which the chosen sample is actually representative. Statistics offers methods to estimate and correct for
any bias in the sample and data collection procedures. There are also methods of experimental design that can lessen these issues at the
outset of a study, strengthening its ability to discern truths about the population.
Sampling theory is part of the mathematical discipline  of probability theory . Probability is used in mathematical statistics  to study the
sampling distributions  of sample statistics  and, more generally, the properties of statistical procedures . The use of any statistical method
is valid only when the system or population under consideration satisfies the assumptions of the method. The difference in point of viewStatistical data
Data collection
Sampling4/1/26, 2:47 AM Statistics - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Statistics 3/26
between classic probability theory and sampling theory is, roughly, that probability theory starts with the given parameters of a total
population to deduce  probabilities that pertain to samples. Statistical inference, however, moves in the opposite direction— inductively
inferring  from samples to the parameters of a larger or total population.
A common goal for a statistical research project is to investigate causality , and in particular to draw a conclusion on the effect of changes
in the values of predictors or independent variables on dependent variables . There are two major types of causal statistical studies:
experimental studies  and observational studies . In both types of studies, the effect of differences of an independent variable (or
variables) on the behavior of the dependent variable are observed. The difference between the two types lies in how the study is actually
conducted. Each can be very effectiv e. An experimental study involves taking measurements of the system under study, manipulating
the system, and then taking additional measurements with different levels  using the same procedure to determine if the manipulation
has modified the values of the measurements. In contrast, an observatio nal study does not involve experimental manipulation . Instead,
data are gathered and correlations between predictors and response are investigated. While the tools of data analysis work best on data
from randomized studies , they are also applied to other kinds of data—like natural experiments  and observational studies[19]—for which
a statistician would use a modified, more structured estimation method (e.g., difference in differences estimation  and instrumental
variables , among many others) that produce consistent estimators .
The basic steps of a statistical experiment are:
1. Planning the research, including finding the number of replicates of the study, using the following information: preliminary estimates
regarding the size of treatment effects, alternative hypotheses, and the estimated experimental variability. Consideration of the selection of
experimental subjects and the ethics of research is necessary. Statisticians recommend that experiments compare (at least) one new
treatment with a standard treatment or control, to allow an unbiased estimate of the difference in treatment effects.
2. Design of experiments, using blocking to reduce the influence of confounding variables, and randomized assignment of treatments to
subjects to allow unbiased estimates of treatment effects and experimental error. At this stage, the experimenters and statisticians write the
experimental protocol that will guide the performance of the experiment and which specifies the primary analysis of the experimental
data.
3. Performing the experiment following the experimental protocol and analyzing the data following the experimental protocol.
4. Further examining the data set in secondary analyses, to suggest new hypotheses for future study.
5. Documenting and presenting the results of the study.Experimental and observational studies
Experiments4/1/26, 2:47 AM Statistics - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Statistics 4/26
Experiments on human behavior have special concerns. The famous Hawthorne study  examined changes to the working environment at
the Hawthorne plant of the Western Electric Company . The researchers were interested in determining whether increased illumination
would increase the productivity of the assembly line workers. The researchers first measu red the productivity in the plant, then modified
the illumination in an area of the plant and checked if the changes in illumination affected productivity. It turned out that productivity
indeed improved (under the experimental conditions). However, the study is heavily criticized today for errors in experimental
procedures, specifically for the lack of a control group  and blindness . The Hawthorne effect  refers to finding that an outcome (in this
case, worker productivity) changed due to observation itself. Those in the Hawthorne study became more productive not because the
lighting was changed but because they were being observed.[20]
An example of an observational stud y is one that explores the association between smoking and lung cancer. This type of study typically
uses a survey to collect observations about the area of interest and then performs statistical analysis. In this case, the researchers would
collect observations of both smokers and non-smokers, perhaps through a cohort study , and then look for the number of cases of lung
cancer in each group.[21] A case-control study  is another type of observational study in which people with and without the outcome of
interest (e.g. lung cancer) are invited to participate and their exposure histories are collected.
Various attempts have been made to produce a taxonomy of levels of measurement . The psychophysicist Stanley Smith Stevens  defined
nominal, ordinal, interval, and ratio scales. Nominal measurements do not have meaningful rank order among values, and permit any
one-to-one (injective) transformation. Ordinal measurements have imprecise differences between consecutive values, but have a
meaningful order to those values, and permit any order-preserving transformation. Interval measurements have meaningful distances
between measurements defined, but the zero value is arbitrary (as in the case with longitude  and temperature  measurements in Celsius
or Fahrenheit ), and permit any linear transformation. Ratio measurements have both a meaningful zero value and the distances
between different measurements defined, and permit any rescaling transformation.
Because variables conforming only to nominal or ordinal measurements cannot be reasonably measured numerically, sometimes they
are grouped together as categorical variables , whereas ratio and interval measurements are grouped together as quantitative variables ,
which can be either discrete  or continuous , due to their numerical nature. Such distinctions can often be loosely correlated with data
type  in computer science, in that dichotomous categorical variables may be represented with the Boolean data type , polytomous
categorical variables with arbitraril y assigned integers  in the integral data type , and continuous variables with the real data type
involving floating-point arithmetic . But the mapping of computer science data types to statistical data types depends on which
categorization of the latter is being implemented.Observational study
Types of data4/1/26, 2:47 AM Statistics - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Statistics 5/26